Dialogue I 

Saturnus:

Listen! I have tasted of all the books from every land
across the sea by means of their knotted letters
and the learned arts; have unlocked Libya and Greece,
likewise the libri historiae of the Indian realm.
These expounders of tales have guided me
into that great many of books…. (B.1-6a)

Thus I never could discover it in all those olden writings
gathered up truly. Nevertheless I sought
which of the mindful and the majestic,
of the courageous or the wealthy or the manly
might be that Pater Noster palm-bedecked. (B.7b-12)

I will give you it all, son of David,
prince of Israel—thirty pounds
of pure gold as well as my sons twelve—
if you would bring me what I have been incited to seek
by these canticles’ quotation, Christ’s cable—
soothe me with the sooth, and I shall
fare forwards unharmed, turn myself
at will upon the water’s back,
over the River Chebar to seek the Chaldeans. (B.13-20)

 

Solomon:

He shall be wretched on earth, unavailing of life
wasted of wisdom, wandering as a beast
a field-travelling cow deprived of wit,
who does not knows how to praise Christ
by way of the canticles, wandering full of wind—
the devil strikes him with iron shot,
on Doomsday, the dragon, terrifyingly,
shamefully, from an ebon sling—
they all are grown from the heads
of the scornful waves. (B.21-29)

Then it would be more pleasing to him
when all this bright creation
is forged from the ground, of gold and silver,
in the four corners of the Earth, filled with costly treasures,
if he ever could know aught of this blessed song.
Then he will be abominable and estranged from the Lord Almighty,
much unlike to the angels, turning away alone. (A.30-35)

 

Saturnus:

Yet who can most easily in the count
of all creation brightly open up
that holy portal into heaven’s realm? (ll. 36-38)

 

Solomon:

That palm-bedecked Pater Noster will open up
the heavens, and give bliss to the holy,
make the Measurer merciful, strike down murder,
extinguish the devil’s flames, yet kindle the Lord’s. (ll. 39-42)

Likewise you could, with that bright prayer,
warm up the blood, the devil’s dreary gore,
that ascends from him in drops,
strengthened in blood-sweat, in seven causes,
terrifying, then its brazen grasp,
over the grip of gledes, surges most greedily,
on behalf of twelve generations of mankind. (ll. 43-48)

Therefore the canticle has, above all Christ’s books,
the most widely-renowned words — he teaches the scriptures,
steering the tribes and holding their place,
of the realm of heaven, carrying their battle-tackle. (ll. 49-52)

 

Saturnus:

Yet of what sort is that song in the memories
in order to cultivate for those who wish
to smelt their spirits against felonies,
purify them from sorrows,
separate them from the criminals? (ll. 53-56a)

Indeed the Shaper gave them a glorious form.
Very often in the world my curiosity asks me about this,
eager to proceed, confusing my mind. (ll. 56b-59a)

No man knows, no hero under heaven,
how my heart has sunk, busy after its books.
Sometimes a burning mounts in me,
my mind seething anxiously near my heart. (ll. 59b-62)

 

Solomon:

Golden is that pronouncement of God, adorned with gemstones,
and it has silver leaves. As one anyone can,
through the grace of the spirit, speak the good news.
It shall be wisdom of understanding, and honey of the soul,
and milk of the mind, most blessed of glory-deeds. (ll. 63-67)

It can rescue those souls from perpetual dark
beneath the earth, and never shall the fiend attach
them with fetters into those nether regions—
and though he should bind them with fifty chains,
it will shatter that skill and sunder all those cunning ideas. (ll. 68-72)

It shall destroy hunger and plunder hell,
scatter the welling flame and timber up glory.
It is the more mindful in middle-earth,
stronger in its foundation than the grip of any stone. (ll. 73-76)

It is leech to the lame, a light to the blind,
also it is the door to the deaf, the tongue of the speechless,
shield of the sinning, the stronghold of the Shaper,
bearer across the waves, savior of the people,
guardian of the tides, of the miserable fishes,
wellspring of wyrms, wood to wild beasts,
and warden of the wasteland, and courtyard to the worthy. (ll. 77-83)

And he who wishes to sing eagerly and truly
that pronouncement of God and who wishes
to love him always without blemish,
he can put that hateful ghast to flight,
the fighting fiend, if first you bring from above
the fearsome prologa prima, peorth (P) by name:
that warrior holds a long staff, a golden goad,
and eternally the strong-minded scourges
that gruesome enemy—and pursuing him
along his tracks, ac (A) of overweening might,
also striking him down. Tir (T) injures him
stabbing him in the tongue, twisting his throat,
shattering his jaws. Eoh (E) harms him,
as he always wants to stand fixed upon
every one of his enemies. Then rad (R) angrily
attacks him in his displeasure, prince of all book-staves,
shaking at once the fiend by his locks,
causing flint to burst the shanks of spirits—
he never considers the joint of their limbs—
he will not be a good leech to them. (ll. 84-102)

Then the devil travels under the skies, seeking a battlement,
helmeted in shadow — indeed woe shall come to him
in his heart, when hanging he wishes for hell,
for that most constricted of homesteads. (ll. 103-6)

At that point, the twins of the church shall destroy him,
nyd (N) and os (O) together. Either one brings a whip
from their way. They shall afflict for a space of time
the estranged flesh-home, mourning not for the soul. (ll. 107-10)

Then sigel (S) comes, counselor to angels,
staff of glory, snatching the wrathful fiend
by the feet, making the cheek fall forward
onto the strong stone, scattering his teeth
throughout the throng of hell.
Each one hides himself through the gloom
of shadows—the scather shall be overcome,
Satan’s thane cut silent completely. (ll. 111-17)

Likewise cweorth (Q) and ur (U) shall humble
death itself, fearsome generals faring forwards
against him—they have spears of light,
long shafts, stout-hearted scourges.
They do not withhold their blows,
their grievous dints. The devil is hateful to them. (ll. 118-22)

Then is (I) and lagu (L) and the angry cen (C)
shall begird the devil with war, those crooked staves
bearing a bitter terror. They shall subdue at once
the captive of hell who goes backwards. (ll. 123-26)

Then feoh (F) and mon (M) shall press about him
from without, the criminal enemy. They have sharp spears,
a terrible hail of arrows, they kindle flames
in the fiend’s hair and strew a bitter terror
with deadly shafts. Grimly and severely
the slayers shall atone for the fact
that they often broke into boasting. (ll. 127-32)

Then next the vaulted gar (G) quiets him
forcibly, who God sends to his friends
as a comfort. Dæg (D) comes forth afterwards
filled with fivefold power, the third shall be fire,
the staff near the street, waiting motionless.
Hægl (H) hastens, an angel clothes him,
Christ’s champion, in living garments,
requesting God’s new clothing. (ll. 133-40)

Then the twins shall scourge them severely
upon the breeze, under the horde of stars,
with the points of twigs, with silver switches,
until their bones gleam, their veins go bleeding—
they shall pour out spear-rage upon the gluttonous devil. (ll. 141-45)

The statement of God can always put to flight
the fiends, one and all, the throng of the sinful
for the sake of every human, through the mouth of mankind,
and can torment swart demons—although they shall never
change their forms so wondrously, assuming plumage
across their bone-coffers. Sometimes they grasp sailors.
Sometimes they carry forth in the bodies of serpents,
strong and sharp-toothed, stinging animals
ambling in the field, carrying off cattle.
Sometimes the devil fells a horse in the water,
chopping him down with his horns,
until the blood of its heart tumbles to the earth,
a foaming flooding bath.
Sometimes he manacles an ill-fated man,
weighing down his hands—
then he must struggle for his life
in a war against a host of the hateful. (ll. 146-60)

The devil inscribes upon his weapon
a horde of deadly runes, baleful book-staves,
ensorceling his sword, his glorious blade.
Therefore let no man draw forth the weapon’s edge
too often, without due regard, although its form
pleases him well—yet he must always sing,
when he should sweep out his sword,
“Pater Noster” and pray for that palm-tree
with bliss, so that he may give them both
his soul and hands, when his foe steps forth. (ll. 161-69)

 

 

Dialogue II

What I have learned through disputation in days gone by,
mind-perceiving men, counselors of middle-earth
working about their wisdom. They do worse who deceive
or who contend with the truth. Solomon was more renowned,
though Saturnus, that bold chieftain, kept the key
to certain books, the lock of learning. (ll. 170-75a)

He wandered through every land: the Indian Ocean,
the East-Cosseans, the realms of Persia and Palestine,
the citadel of Nineveh, the Northern Parthians,
the treasure-halls of the Medes, the yard of Marcolf,
the realm of Saul, as he lay to the south
about Gilboa, and about Geador to the north,
the hall of the Philistines, the fortress of the Greeks,
the forest of Egypt, the waters of Midian,
the rock of Mount Horeb, the realm of Chaldea,
the crafts of the Greeks, the kindred of Arabia,
the learning of Libya, the lands of Syria,
Bithynia, Bashan, Pamphilia, the boundaries of Porus,
Macedonia, Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, and Christ’s homeland:
Jericho, Galilee and Jerusalem…. (ll. 175b-92)

 

Solomon:

                      …… or I may keep silent,
thinking about what is profitable, although
I would never speak it. I know then, if you depart
upon the Wendel-sea, across the River Chobar,
seeking your native land, that you would have boasted
that you have overcome and overmastered
the child of men. I know that the Chaldeans
were boastful at war and gold-proud,
glorious in their arrogance, where it happened
to the multitude, southward on Shinar field.
Say to me where no man could set foot in that land. (ll. 193b-202)

 

Saturnus:

That famous man was called the Ravening Wolf,
a sea-sailor, known to the tribal nation
of the Philistines, the friend of Nimrod.
On that field he slew five and twenty
dragons at dawn, and then he fell himself, dead. (ll. 203-07)

Therefore, no human, no man, can seek out
that space of earth, that border-land—
birds cannot fly over it, no more than the beasts of the earth. (ll. 208-10)

Thenceforth some sort of poison sprung forth
widely at first, when swarming through the breath
of venom, an entrance opened up. (ll. 211-13)

Yet his sword glitters, shining strongly,
and across the gravesites the hilt glimmers still. (ll. 214-15)

 

Solomon:

Foolish is he who goes upon deep water
without knowing how to swim, without a sailed ship,
without the flight of birds, nor can touch the bottom
with his feet. Indeed, he tempts
the Lord God’s might very unwisely. (ll. 216-220)

 

Saturnus:

But what is the speechless one, who sleeps
in a certain valley? He is vigorously clever,
and has seven tongues—and each of those tongues
bears twenty piercing points, and each those points
contains the wisdom of angels—
Whichever one who wishes to bring it up,
so that you may see the walls sparkling
of golden Jerusalem and their gleaming cross of joy,
the most truthful of signs. Say what I’m thinking about! (ll. 221-28)

 

Solomon:

Those books are famous! They teach abundantly
an appointed desire to those who think at all,
strengthening themselves and establishing
a steadfast thought, cheering the heart
of every man from the closing constraint of this life. (ll. 229-33)

 

Saturnus:

He is bold who tastes of the books’ craft,
always he will be the wiser who holds their power. (ll. 234-35)

 

Solomon:

They send forth victory to all of the soothfast,
the harbor of salvation, to those who love them. (ll. 236-37)

 

Saturnus:

A singular thing exists in this worldly realm,
about it curiosity has broken me
for fifty winters, by day and by night,
through deep destiny, a grieving spirit—
yet it shall do this, until the Eternal Lord
grants me what might satisfy a wiser man. (ll. 238-43)

 

Solomon:

You speak truly: I shall satisfy you right away
about that wondrous creature.
Do you wish that I should tell you? (ll. 244-45)

A singular bird sits in the middle of the Philistine
realm; a mountain lies round about it,
a broad golden wall. The Philistine wise men
keep it zealously, believing that it is nothing,
that an entire nation must snatch it away from them
with the blades of weapons. They know of this compact:
they keep it every night, by the north and the south,
in two halves, with two hundred wardens. (ll. 246-53)

This bird has four heads of the average man’s size,
and the middle of it is the size of a whale—
it has the wings of a vulture and the feet of a griffon.
It lies down, secure in its chains, louring about fiercely,
flapping its wings vigorously and its fetters ring,
screeching miserably, lamenting its misfortunes,
wallowing in its torment, dwelling joylessly,
singing out strangely—seldom ever do his limbs
lie still. Severely he longs for freedom,
seeming to him that it might be thrice thirty
thousand winters before he should hear
the din of Doomsday. No man of the kindred of earth
knows what it is within this world,
until I alone discovered it and commanded it
to be thrown into bonds across the broad waters,
so that that mindful one, the son of Melot,
first of the Philistines, ordered it bound fast,
locked up into chains against its folk-terror.
The distant dwellers, first of the Philistines,
call that bird by the name of Vasa Mortis. (ll. 254-72)

 

Saturnus:

Yet what is that wonder that fares throughout the world,
going forth inexorably, beating upon the bases,
rousing drops of tears, often struggling to get here?

Neither star nor stone can evade it at all,
nor the brilliant jewel, water or wild beast—

yet it proceeds in the hand of the hard and the soft,
the great and middling. Every ground-dweller,
breeze-sailor and wave-swimmer,

must go yearly to the feast, reckoned
thrice thirteen thousand times. (ll. 273-82)

 

Solomon:

Old age is crafty over everything earthly—
reaching widely with a ravaging captive-chain,
with spacious fetters and a lengthy rope,
overwhelming all whom she wishes to.

It destroys the tree and shatters its branches,
tumbling the standing stock from its course,
felling it to the ground, and devouring it afterwards.

It vanquishes the wolf and the wild fowl,
outlasting the stones, overcoming steel—
it bites into iron with rust, as it does us all. (ll. 283-92)

 

Saturnus:

But why does the snow fall, hiding the earth,
veiling the seeds of herbs, binding the blossoms.
It crushes and checks them so that they shall be
withered by the cold for a season? (ll. 293-96a)

Very often it also afflicts a multitude of beasts,
bridging over the wetness, breaking down
the gates of the city, proceeding boldly
and ravaging…. (ll. 296b-99)

 

a leaf is missing

 
[Solomon:]

…. much greater when that cunning malice
that guides him into those hateful houses
amid that wicked army with the devil as desire. (ll. 300-302)

 

Saturnus:

Night is the darkest of weather—
Compulsion is the sternest of outcomes—
Sorrow is the heaviest of burdens—
Sleep is the most like death. (ll. 303-4)

 

Solomon:

For a short time, the leaves will be green,
when they soon grow fallow, falling to the earth,
decaying there, becoming dust.

So they collapse then, those who stay the course
of their sins for a long time, abiding in wickedness,
concealing high-treasures, holding eagerly onto
the citadel, with devils as their desire,

and only fools believe that the Glory-King,
Almighty God, will wish to heed them. (ll. 305-13)

 

Saturnus:

It shall be apparent at once after the wave
must flow out across all the lands,
nor will it wish to cease its course,
after the time has come for it,
so that it should heed the din of Judgment Day. (ll. 314-17)

 

Solomon:

Then woe shall come to these moody men,
those who here and now dwell in this loaned world
the longest in their wickedness!

Formerly your people proved that fact:

They struggled against the might of the Lord—
therefore they did not complete their work.

Yet I must not offend you, brother—
you are an angry and mighty people
of such bitter stock. Run not into their evil nature! (ll. 318-22)

 

Saturnus:

Say to me, Solomon King, son of David,
what are the four ropes doomed to death? (ll. 323-24)

 

Solomon:

“Outcomes bound to befall”:
those are the four ropes doomed to death. (ll. 325-26)

 

Saturnus:

Yet who will judge Lord Christ then
on Doomsday when he judges all of creation? (ll. 327-28)

 

Solomon:

Who dares to judge then the Lord who wrought us from dust,
the Savior from night’s wound? Yet tell me what might not be that is not? (ll. 329-30)

 

Saturnus:

Yet why may not the sun shine so brightly
upon all of broad creation? Why does she
overshadow the mountains and the moors
and many other waste places as well?
How did this become so? (ll. 331-34)

 

Solomon:

Yet why were all earth-dwellers not divided
into like peoples? Some have too little greed for good.
God sets it as rest for the fortunate by their merits. (ll. 335-38)

 

Saturnus:

Yet why are weeping and laughter set together
as companions? Very often those desirous of honor
destroy their own happiness. How does that happen? (ll. 339-41)

 

Solomon:

He shall be miserable and wretched who always
wishes to be mournful in anxiety—
He shall be most vile to God. (ll. 342-43)

 

Saturnus:

Why are we all not allowed to go forwards
with courage into God’s kingdom? (ll. 344-45)

 

Solomon:

The grip of flame and the chill of frost
can not dwell together, snow nor sunlight,
enduring life—yet each of them must
submit and yield, the one with lesser power. (ll. 346-49) 

 

Saturnus:

Why do the worse live longer then?
In this worldly realm the worse know not
a greater grace in their friendly kin. (ll. 350-52)

 

Solomon:

Nor can one delay for any space of time
that grievous journey, but must endure it. (ll. 353-54)

 

Saturnus:

Yet how does it happen for good or evil?
When they are both conceived by one woman,
two twins, nor shall their glory be alike:
one shall be wretched upon the earth,
while the other shall be most blessed,
well-regarded amongst the multitude of his people—
the first lives but a little while,
failing in this broad creation, departing soon with sorrow.
I ask you, lord Solomon, which of their lot is the better? (ll. 355-61)

 

Solomon:

A mother cannot control, when she conceives a child
what long journey will be shaped for him through this world.
Often she begets her baby in pain, to her own sorrow,
afterwards she endures his labor pangs, his destined hour.
Often and frequently she must greet this son grimly,
when he fares forth too young. She has a wild mind,
a weary heart, a sorrowful understanding. (ll. 362-70a)

She slides often into weariness, deprived of desire,
shorn of glory. Sometimes, mind-miserable,
she guards the hall, living far from her kin—
often she looks away from her lonely lord, wretched. (ll. 370b-74)

Therefore the mothers does not possess control,
when her child is conceived, of the fruits of her offspring,
but she must go on according to her fate,
one after another—that is the olden course of things. (ll. 375-77)

 

Saturnus:

And why does man not wish to eagerly work for himself
in his youth, after noble reputation and a doer of deeds,
to wade after wisdom, to struggle after understanding? (ll. 378-80)

 

Solomon:

Listen, a fortunate earl can easily choose for himself
within his mind’s comprehension a mild lord,
a singular nobleman. But the wretched can not do so. (ll. 381-83)

 

Saturnus:

And why does this water struggle throughout the worldly realm,
fulfilling deep creation? Nor is it allowed to rest by day,
venturing by night, going forth by constraining art,
christening and cleansing many of the living,
beautifying them in glory. I do not know any bit
why that current is not allowed to be still by night… (ll. 384-89)

 

a leaf is missing

 
[Solomon:]

…. within the embrace of his life. Always it will be obedient
to his precepts. Very often it also humiliates the host of devils
where there are a multitude of wise men together,
then the tasty bit slips away from the wise man,
when he stoops after it by the light of vision—
he blesses it and it tastes good, and devours it himself. (ll. 390-95)

Such a lonely morsel will be that much better
for every man, if it is crossed in blessing,
in order to be eaten, if he can remember to,
then the feast of the seventh day shall be his. (ll. 396-99)

Light has the hue and form of the Holy Ghost,
the nature of Christ—it reveals that very often.
If it keeps a foolish man for any amount of time
out of fetters, it streams down through the roof,
breaking and burning down the bold building,
hanging steep and wide, mounting at length,
climbing up to its nature. It knows when it may
fire from its first-origin, in the yards of its father,
soon to its homeland, whence it came at the start. (ll. 400-08)

It will be entirely in the earl’s sight
who knows how to share the Lord’s torch.
Therefore there is no kindred of living creatures,
neither fowl nor fish, nor stone of the earth,
nor welling of water, nor branch of a tree,
nor mountain nor moor, nor this middle-earth,
that it may not be of the fiery family from here on out. (ll. 409-415)

 

Saturnus:

Very often I have heard long ago aged men
speaking and swearing about a certain matter
which of the two might have been without doubt
of their strength, destiny warning you, when they often struggle
with their compelling force, and which was wearied before. (ll. 416-20)

I know truly, they said to me formerly,
the Philistine wisemen, when we sat at disputation,
spreading out books and laying them on our laps,
mixing up discourse, taking up many of them,
so that there would be no man of middle-earth
that could trace out any doubt in those two. (ll. 421-26)

 

Solomon:

Outcomes shall be turned aside only with difficulty,
raging frequently enough—she arouses weeping,
she injures the spirit, she bears the years.

And which wise heart can control all events,
if he be perceptive in mind and wishes to seek out
comfort to his friends—moreover, make use of religious spirits. (ll. 427-33)

 

Saturnus:                                                             

And what do the outcomes so powerful impute to use,
the origin of every crime, mother of feuds,
root of woes, head of lamentation, father and mother of every one of the capital sins,
and death’s daughter? And why is this condition among us?
Listen, as long as she lives, she will never tire
of begetting conflict through the strife of sin. (ll. 434-40)

 

Solomon:

There must be no fellowship in God’s realm
between the blessed angels and the over-proud.
One obeys his Lord, the other works for himself through devious crafts
a standard and mail-shirt, saying that he wishes to plunder
all the heavenly kingdom with his fellows, and then to sit upon his own side,
to propagate with a tenth part of them until he knows the end
to his wrath through inner making. Then the noble prince becomes
disturbed by the devil’s counsel, causing him to fall then
from the mountaintop, felling him then under the corners of the earth,
ordering him to be bound fast there. (ll. 441-49)

It was those fiends who fought us—
therefore there is an increase of weeping
for every wise man. Then the blessed discovered that,
the Lord of Angels, that they did not take to their teaching
for long, casting them out then from the glory,
and scattering them widely, and the Child of the Heaven-Dewellers
commanded him that they must also dwell in the welling,
suffering lamentation, so long as they live,
misery under heaven—and shaped Hell for them,
a killing-cold abode, covered over by winter,
sent into the water and the pits of serpents,
a terrible fierce many, with iron horns,
bloody eagles and black adders,
thirst and hunger and severe struggling,
a terror to the eye, a sorrowing—
and all of these torments will stand forever for him,
without change, all the while they should live. (ll. 450-66)

 

Saturnus:

Then is there any man on this earth,
those who ever claim earthly kindred,
constrained by death, before the day comes
that his count of days should clean run out
and one should call him out necessarily?

 

Solomon:

The Lord of Heaven sends forth an angel for all men,
when the day is stirred, he who must behold
how his mind wishes to grow up greedy
to the delight of God, longing for the majesty
of the Measurer, while it is that day. (ll. 472-76)

Then they accompany him, two spirits,
one will be bright as gold, the other dark as the abyss—
one comes….
                        …. over hell hard as steel.
One teaches him to keep hold of love,
the Measurer’s mercy and the council of kinsmen. (ll. 477-82)

The other seduces him and teaches him to ruin,
reveals to him and discloses the wicked thoughts
of wretched men, and with that whets his mind,
leading him and latching him, enticing him
across the earth, until his eyes are filled with vexations
and he becomes angered by this miserable shield. (ll. 483-88)

So then the fiend fights in fourfold wise
until he is transformed into a worse guise
by the deeds of devils, in the space of a long day—
and works according to that will,
what entices him into crookedness. (ll. 489-92)

The angel then departs weeping, back on his way,
to his homeland, and says all that:
“Nor could I squeeze out the hardness from his heart,
the steely stone, clinging to his center.” (ll. 493-96)
…..

… should it depart, before he knows the truth,
so that they should cling to the sinful souls,
amidst the hating in the middle of hell.
Then the High-King commands hell to be shut up,
filled with fire, and the fiends with it. (ll. 497-501)

Then the wise son of David had overcome
and rebuked the nobleman of Chaldea.
Nevertheless he was joyful, he who had come
on that journey, travelling from afar—
never before had his very soul laughed. (ll. 502-505)

 

End
