
The Menologium

Christ was conceived the King of Glory,
in the midst of winter, well-renowned prince,
Eternal Almighty, upon the eighth day—
named the Savior, Heaven Kingdom’s Ward.

So at that same time, the broad conclaves,
an immeasurable people, have the forward part of the year,
which is the Kalends to us, coming determined
upon that same day, for us in the towns,

the first of the month—a great number of people
call this space of time January.
And after about the fifth night the day of the baptism
of the Eternal Lord comes to us,

then the day of the twelve, glory-blessed,
heroes excellent in battle, is called
in Britain, here within this land.
Likewise it’s about four weeks later

that Solomon came down to the city
just short of two nights, as they reckoned it of old,
the course of February, the aged companions,
wise in olden days. And about one night later

we keep the mass of Mary,
the king’s mother, because she brought
Christ to the temple on that day,
the Son of the Sovereign.

Then about five nights later winter is affrighted
from the habitations, and that warrior then
after seventeen counts of night,
suffered his death, the thane of the Savior,

famous Matthias, as I have heard,
after the springtime in the town
has come a-sailing in for the homebound men,
Such is widely known as well

about three and two nights later
by people everywhere, the Kalends come
for churls and earls (unless a leap-year
has been ordained every fourth year—

then it comes further along
later about one night for us in the town),
decorated with rime, pouring in hail-showers
throughout middle-earth, stern March,

which we call the lofty Hylda.
Then the holy noble Gregory
afterwards about eleven nights later
shone forth in God’s service,

famous in Britain. Likewise Benedict
about nine nights later sought his Savior,
severe and strong of mind—
than we praise him well in wise scriptures,

the servant of the Sovereign,
warriors fixed to their rule.
Likewise by number-counting
in that same season, we keep the Equinox,

because Wielding God worked at the start
on that same day the sun and the moon.
Listen! about four nights later
the Father sent down after the Equinox

held by noble people, his arch-angel,
who announced great salvation
to Mary, who must conceive the Measurer,
Best of Kings, as it became revealed

throughout middle-earth—that was a famous event,
known by the people! Likewise
after three and four counts of night
the Savior sent the month of April

in which most often comes that well-known time
as a comfort to men, first of the Lord—
than joy arises well-nigh everywhere,
as the wise man sings: “This is the day

when the Lord was fashioned wisdom-fast
for our benefit, the generations of mankind,
every one of the earth-dwellers,
prosperous unto their bliss.”

We cannot keep that season in accounting,
the number of days, nor can the Lord mount
upwards into the heavens, because always
they turn from the sentences of the wise,

yet must the man aged in winters
discover with skill the cycle of the Zodiac
and its holy days. We must nevertheless
reckon up memories of the martyrs more greatly,

driven forth wordfully, sung by the knowing,
about nineteen and five nights later
the time of Easter arrives for us afterwards,
that one begins to rear up the relics,

prepared in a holy way—that is a lofty day,
the renowned prayer-time. Likewise swiftly
in the citadels about six nights later,
elegantly in its readiness, among woods and plants

the beautiful season comes gliding
magnificently into the towns, bringing needfully
great May throughout every multitude.
So upon that same day, the noble comrades,

Philip and Jacob, were granted life,
the proud kinsmen, out of the Measurer’s love.
And after about two more nights
God revealed to blessed Helena

the most noble of trees,
upon which the Prince of Angels suffered
for the love of man, the Measurer upon the gallows
with the permission of the Father.

Likewise about the space of a week later
except for one night summer brings
sun-bright days to humankind
in towns, the warmth of weather.

Then swiftly the fields blossom with blooms,
likewise happiness mounts high
throughout middle-earth for the ranks of many
the kindred of the quickened,

speaking their manifold praises to the King,
celebrating the renowned Almighty.
And about eight and night counts of day later
the Lord assumed in another light

Augustine, blithe in his breast,
after he discovered here in Britain
noble men, obedient to him,
to the desires of God, as the wise one

commanded him, Gregory the Great.
I have never heard of old of any man
before who ever brought such
great lore across the sea’s saltiness,

a more famous bishop. Now he rests
in Britain, in Canterbury, near to the people’s seat,
within the famous minster. Then a month brings
to us in the towns, the earlier one in Litha,

about the length of two and four hours—
June in the yards, when that gem climbs
up into the heavens highest during the year,
the brightest of the stars, and descends

from that point, sinking to its setting.
It wishes to draw near to the earth after
longer and go along later across the plains of earth,
the fairest light, this worldly creation.

Then the thane of glory, John, the Prince’s dear one
was born about thirteen and ten nights later—
we observe that time of greatness
in mid-summer in its nature.

The holy time of Peter and Paul
is honored widely among the children of heroes,
as is befitting. Listen, those apostles
prince-loyal suffered in Rome

after mid-summer most certainly,
five nights further along, a severe folk-harm,
a notorious martyrdom—they had worked
many miracles earlier throughout the human-nations,

likewise they performed countless deeds more
readily apparent and visible, these lord-thanes
after their death, through the Son of the Measurer.
Then right away comes about two nights later

the month of July in good time for us,
in which James gave up his life
about twenty and four nights later,
firm in his breast, aged and fixed of counsel

the teacher of the people, the heir of Zebedee.
And then afterwards the summer glides away
always about seven nights later, illuminating Weod-month
in the town, bringing everywhere August

to the widespread people, Lammas Day.
So comes the harvest-time, about another week
except for one day lacking, beautiful, burdened with blossoms—
prosperity will be revealed, fair upon the earth.

Then St. Lawrence, faithful to his Prince, departed forth
about three nights later through martyrdom, the famous deacon—
he now has life with the Glory-Father,
repayment for the work of ropes.

Likewise about five nights later the fairest maiden,
the glory of women, sought the God of Hosts
with peace for her son, a victory-fast home
in Paradise-plain—the Savior then had repaid

that woman a reward fairly for her fostering
eternally in life. Then Bartholomew
always honored the day about ten nights later,
here in Britain, an excellent event.

Likewise it is widely revealed to earls
the death of the nobleman about four nights
later, he who once cast water upon
the well-born Son of Glory, the worthy warrior.

The Sovereign spoke about him, saying that
there was no greater person throughout middle-earth
had ever been conceived between man and woman.
And about three nights later, through many nations

it is Holy-month, agreed upon by the heroes,
ferried to the folk, just as the fore-minded men,
aged historians, discovered much earlier,
the coming of September, and by the seventh day

the best of women was conceived, the mother of the Lord.
Then a multitude of days later, about thirteen nights,
a thane well-renowned, wise in God’s message
sent forth his spirit, Matthew into the keeping of the Measurer,

into perpetual joys. Then it always arrives
about three nights later to broad peoples
a night evenly long, to the children of humanity.
Listen, we worthy widely throughout the earth

the time of the high-angel Michael in the autumn,
so that many will know, five nights later
an Equinox is revealed to the earls, to the people.
And about two nights later, the tenth month

is carried unto the people, covered by the ancient,
October in the towns, called by us Winter-filleth
abundantly for us, as the Angles and the Saxons,
the island-dwellers, announce it widely,

both men and women. Likewise the time of warriors
about twenty days later, two and seven by night
gathered together into a single day. Then we have learned
about those noblemen of old, those were illustrious,

Simon and Judas, always dear to the Lord—
because they cast their lots in judgment,
upon the blessed upward way.
And about four nights later most quickly

brings the Blot-month abundant to the people
in the towns, as a feasting for warriors,
November, for the children of humanity,
prosperous, as no other can do

a greater month by the mercy of the Lord.
And with that same day we keep
the holy feast for all who, earlier or later,
perform in the world the desires of the Lord.

After a winter’s day goes forth widely
in six nights, seizing the sky-bright
harvest-time with praises, fettered
by rime and snow and frost

by the commandment of our Master,
who will not allow us to dwell
upon green fields, with the ornaments of the earth.
After about four night later, Martin

the remarkable departed us,
a man without blot, seeking his Sovereign,
the Warden of Upper Angels.
Then about eight and four nights later

the good fan? sank into the sea-bottom,
a victory-fast man upon the hoary sea,
who of old many warriors had need
to call him often by the name of Clement.

And about seven nights later, noble Andrew,
beloved by the Lord of Victories,
gave up his spirit into the coven of God,
eager to hurry upon the forth-way,

upwards into the heavens.
Then the month of December brings
to the people, to humanity, the morning
to the towns, to the children of the Lord,

called the Yule once upon a time.
Likewise about eight and twelve counts of night later
the Savior himself granted bold-minded Thomas
the eternal kingdom in exchange for his troubles,

a doughty war-fighter given his blessing.
Then about four nights later the Father of Angels
sent his own son into this broad creation
as a comfort to the people. Now you all can find

the holy times that man must hold onto,
so this prayer encompasses us
throughout the realm of Britain,
the Saxon kings in this same season.

