
The Order of the World

i.

Do you wish, hurrying hero, to wordfully hail the alien,
the wise wielder of prophecies — inquire of one much-traveled
about the creation to come, ask him to tell you
of kindly crafts, kicking quick, of broad destinies
which on every day should bring forth
miracles aplenty through the magnificence of God 
unto the generations of men? (ll. 1-7)

Tokens manifest to every one in solitude,
who through wisdom the brooding man
knows how to perceive the entire world
within the breast — skills of the singer 
so that many years ago, and with the verses 
that humanity, warriors counsel-fast,
often knew the way to spit them out* and speak rightly —
always posing a question of the human family
and speaking about the entangling of cunning mysteries
ever mindful of what the greatest men knew. (ll. 8-16)

Therefore one must inquire, he who lives in courage,
that deep-hearted man, into secret creations —
inscribe the skill of word-hoards within the mind  —
give it its place in the spirit’s close,
and imagine it outwards stoutly —
nor must it weary a meditative man afterwards
to mindfully perfect the world. (ll. 17-22)

Learn this lore! I must speak to you without delay
of the Measurer’s majesty greater 
than you, sage-crafty in your chest, 
are able to comprehend with your mind.
Is that power of yours very great? (ll. 23-26)

That is not the measure of man —
dust dancing — 
so that he might be able in his breast
to sound out lofty creation any further
than the Lord should grant him to embrace—
God’s own decree. But we must thank
the Glorious Prince ever forever
for everything which the Eternal King
wishes to grant us, the shape in our souls —
so that we can easily ascend
onwards to the celestial kingdom,
if our spirits suffice, wanting to hold
onto the decrees of the Heaven-King. (ll. 27-36)

 

ii.

Now hear this magnificent message, affix your thought—
what the Father Almighty shaped at the start,
the Warden of High Hoards: heaven and earth,
the broad bed of the ocean, all of patent creation,
which now humbled by the Lord’s hand
heightens and heaves up the holy breath. (ll. 37-42)

He who readily knows therefore joined all,
everything its mate; they must all mind
stiff direction, just as the rudder directs them
various measures through that mighty nature. (ll. 43-46)

So they bear forth beauty into the world,
the Glory of the Lord and his majestic deeds,
his glittering praise into those lengthy times,
performing faithfully the word of the Eternal Lord
in that first throne where the Master seats himself,
the pure Guardian of Heaven, eagerly holding
the boundaries of the ocean. His might draws forth
the heaven-candle and, among the waves,
the Owner of Life calls out and leads
into the embrace of union all creation. (ll. 47-56)

So wide-spirited glory stands for him
of all judges the most fitting,
who shaped this life for us and this bright light
that comes every morning over the misty cliffs,
wading across the waves, adorned with miracles,
and at dawn hastens from the east,
lovely and winsome to the generations of men;
for every one living it bears forth its light
the brightest brands so everything on earth
can enjoy his radiance, which he wishes to give,
the Truth-King of Victories, sight of the eyes.
Then it turns with this glory into the western skies
the star much magnified, traveling together,
until in the evening out of the spear-waves—
traversing the grounds, calling across the gloom—
night comes afterward, keeping his constraining command,
the Holy Lord. The heaven-bright skies
incites the resplendence into the creation of God
under the embrace of the earth, the traveling star. (ll. 57-75)

Therefore there are no men of wisdom living
that can know of his departure through his own power,
how the gold-bright sun passes beyond the earth
into that inky blackness below the crowding waters,
or who of the land-dwellers can enjoy that light,
after she departs over the ocean. (ll. 76-81)

He that readily knows therefore joined
day to night, the deeps to the heights,
breeze to sea-stream, land to water,
flood to flood, fish to the waves.
Nor do these works weaken, but he holds them well;
they stand stoutly, firmly covered over
with his great belt of power in that great majesty
among them may be heaved up heaven and earth, (ll. 82-89)

The ones who abide in that place are blessed then,
hopeful is his hearth-band. That is the greatest army,
an uncountable number of the prosperous, the bands of angels.
They always see their own king,
looking in their eyes and having enough of everything.
There is no dark creature among them, for those who
see the King of Glory in the skies; his is the feast and the joy
eternal and endless, with blessedness as consolation. (ll. 90-97)

 

iii.

Therefore one must consider obeying the Measurer.
Every child of man abandon your useless desires,
the joys of this loaned life, and strive after mild bliss.
Allow every hateful malice to collapse
amid flaming sins—ferry yourself into a richer realm. (ll. 98-102)
