
The Fate of the Apostles

Listen—I discovered this poem, weary of the road,
inside my sickened soul. I gathered it widely:
how these noblemen revealed their courage,
brilliant and blessed in glory. There were twelve
glory-fast in their deeds, selected by their lord,
cherished in life—their praise springs broadly,
their power and reputation across middle-earth,
no small majesty of these thanes of the prince. (1-8)

The casting of lots guided that press of saints,
where they must glorify the Law of the Lord,
reckon before warriors. Certain men, Peter and Paul,
gave up their lives in the Roman city,
zealous and bold in battle, through the narrow treachery of Nero—
Their apostolic state is worthied widely
across the nations of men. (9-15)

Likewise, Andrew in Achaia ventured
his life before Ægias—not at all shrinking
before the majesty of any nation’s king
upon the earth, instead he chose for himself
a perpetual and longer-lasting existence,
the light eternal, after the valiant man
was stretched out upon the gallows
after the battle-play with the clamor of the army. (16-21)

Again, we have also heard reckoned about John
a law-wise men, accounting his lineage.
That man was, as I have learned,
dearest to Christ, through his country,
in his human condition, after the King of Glory,
the Source-Point of Angels, sought the earth
through a woman’s womb, the Father of Mankind.
In Ephesus he instructed the people
for all time—then he sought his journey
upon the life’s way, the joys of heaven,
the bright prosperities of home. (22-33a)

Nor was his brother slow, reluctant to venture,
but through the bite of swords among the Jews,
Jacob must part from his life before Herod,
his soul away from his flesh. (33b-37a)

Phillip was among the Asians:
then he sought forthwith his eternal life
through the killing of a cross,
after he was hanged upon the gallows
in Hieropolis by a battle-band. (37b-41)

Indeed the event became widely unsecret,
so that the battle-crafty warrior led his living
into India, Bartholomew—Astryages,
heathen and heart-blind, ordered him
in Albanum to be deprived of his head,
because he wished not to obey the pagan rites,
nor honor their idols—his were the joys of glory,
the full life dearer than those false gods. (42-49)

Likewise Thomas as well ventured boldly
into another portion of India,
where minds were enlightened for many,
firming up their hearts through his holy word.
After the king’s brother, bold in spirit,
was awakened by glorious craft
before the armies through the power of the Lord,
so that he arose from death,
young and bold in battle (and his name was Gad)—
and then he gave his own soul to the people in strife.
The rush of the sword seized him
through a heathen hand, where the saint fell,
a wound for the sake of the multitude—
from there his soul sought the Light of Glory,
of victory as recompense. (50-62)

More—we have heard through the holy books
that the truth was revealed among the Sun-dwellers,
the glorious judgment of God, the start of day awoke
belief in the light, the land was purified
by Matthias, famous of lore—
Irtacus ordered him with an angry mind,
a slaughter-cruel king, to be put to death with weapons. (63-69)

We have heard that Jacob in Jerusalem
suffered a killing before the priests—
through the swing of a club, the resolute fell down,
blessed because of the malicious. He holds now
eternal life with the Glory-King as reward for his warfaring (70-74)

Those two were not slow to fighting,
the play of shields—they sought the land of Persia,
eager to journey, Simon and Thaddeus,
warriors battle-bold. Those two together
had one single dying day—the noble men
must suffer the deed through weapon-hate,
seek glorious reward and celebrate
that truthful joy after death, when their life
was separated from the body,
and they despised all that loaned treasure,
those idle hoards of wealth. (75-84)

Thus these noblemen were given their end,
these twelve excellent in mind—the thanes of Glory
bear a renown unbroken in their wits. (85-87)

Now then I entreat the man who enjoys
the course of this song to ask mournfully
that holy company for help for me,
for peace and assistance—indeed I am in need
of friends more gracious along the way,
when I must seek out the distant home,
the unknown habitation, permit my body,
my share of this earth in its tracks,
the spoil of slaughter, to abide as comfort to worms. (88-95)

Here one can find, he who is wise of forethought,
who delights in this poetical singing,
him who composed these words.
Riches (F) stand there at the end,
earls enjoy these on the earth—
they are not allowed to be together always,
dwelling upon the earth.
Joy (W) must collapse
ours (U) upon the earth,
must drift apart afterwards,
the adornments of this loaned body,
even so the waters (L) glide away.
Then the torch (C) and the bow (Y)
enjoy their skills with labor at night,
and on them compulsion (N) lies,
the service to the King. Now you can know
who was revealed to men by these words. (96-106)

May he be mindful, he who enjoys
the winding of this spell, so that he is a comfort to me
and implores for my relief. I must seek a home
far from here—going forth alone elsewhere—
must journey onwards—I know not myself where—
from this world. These places are strange to me,
these habitations and homelands.
So it will be for all men, except him
who should enjoy the godly spirit. (107-114)

Yet we who call unto God from without more eagerly,
send our prayer into this bright creation,
so that we are allowed to enjoy this dwelling,
a home in the heights—there is the most hope,
there the King of Angels grants perpetual reward
unto the purified. Now his praise stands forever
great and widely-known, and his power remains,
eternal and always-young, over all creation. (115-120)
